BusTUC
 
- A natural language bus route oracle
 Tore A m b l e Dept. of computer and information science University of Trondheim 
Norway, N-7491
 amble@idi, nt nu. no
 
Abstract
 The paper describes a natural language based expert system route advisor for the 
public bus transport in Trondheim, Norway. The system is available on the 
Internet,and has been intstalled at the bus company's web server since the 
beginning of 1999. The system is bilingual, relying on an internal language 
independent logic representation.
 
In between the question and the answer is a process of lexical analysis, syntax 
analysis, semantic analysis, pragmatic reasoning and database query processing. 
One could argue that the information content could be solved by an 
interrogation, whereby the customer is asked to produce 4 items: s t a t i o n
 of departure, station of arrival, earliest departure timeand/or latest arrival 
time. It
 
Introduction
 
A natural language interface to a computer database provides users with the 
capability of obtaining information stored in the database by querying the 
system in a natural language (NL). With a natural language as a means of 
communication with a computer system, the users can make a question or a 
statement in the way they normally think about the information being discussed, 
freeing them from having to know how the computer stores or processes the 
information. The present implementation represents a a major effort in bringing 
natural language into practical use. A system is developed that can answer 
queries about bus routes, stated as natural language texts, and made public 
through the Internet World Wide Web
 
is a myth that natural language is a better way of communication because it is 
"natural language". The challenge is to prove by demonstration that an NL system 
can be made that will be preferred to the interrogative mode. To do that, the 
system has to be correct, user friendly and almost complete within the actual 
domain.
 
P r e v i o u s Efforts, C H A T - 8 0 , P R A T - 8 9 and HSQL
 
Trondheim is a small city with a university and 140000 inhabitants. Its central 
bus systems has 42 bus lines, serving 590 stations, with 1900 departures per day 
(in average). T h a t gives approximately 60000 scheduled bus station passings 
per day, which is somehow represented in the route data base. The starting point 
is to automate the function of a route information agent. The following example 
of a system response is using an actual request over telephone to the local 
route information company:
 Hi, I live in Nidarvoll and tonight i must reach a train to Oslo at 6 oclock.
 
The system, called BusTUC is built upon the classical system CHAT-80 (Warren and 
Pereira, 1982). CHAT-80 was a state of the art natural language system that was 
impressive on its own merits, but also established Prolog as a viable and 
competitive language for Artificial Intelligence in general. The system was a 
brilliant masterpiece of software, efficient and sophisticated. The natural 
language system was connected to a small query system for international 
geography. The following query could be analysed and answered in a split 
second:
 Which country bordering the Mediterranean borders a country that is bordered by 
a country whose population exceeds the population of India?
 
(The answer 'Turkey' has become incorrect as time has passed. The irony is that 
Geography was chosen as a domain without time.)
 
and a typical answer would follow quickly:
 Bus number 54 passes by Nidarvoll skole at 1710 and arrives at Trondheim Railway 
Station at 1725.
 
The abi!ity to answer ridiculously long queries is of course not the main goal. 
The main lesson is that complex sentences are analysed with a proper 
understanding without sacrificing efficiency. Any superfi-
 
ficial pattern matching technique would prove futile sooner or later. Making a N 
o r w e g i a n CHAT-80, PRAT-89 At the University of Trondheim (NTNU), two 
students made a Norwegian version of CHAT-80,called PRAT-89 (Teigen and Vetland, 
1988),(Teigen and Vetland, 1989). (Also, a similar Swedish project SNACK-85 was 
reported). The dictionary was changed from English to Norwegian together with 
new rules for morphological analysis. The change of grammar from English to 
Norwegian proved to be amazingly easy. It showed that the langauges were more 
similar than one would believe, given that the languages are incomprehensible to 
each other's communities. After changing the dictionary and graramar, the 
following Norwegian query about the same domain could be answered correctly in a 
few seconds.
 Hvilke afrikanske land som hat en befolkning stoerre enn 3 millioner og mindre 
enn 50 millioner og er nord
 for Botswana og oest for Libya hat en hovedstad som hat en befolkning stoerre 
enn 100 tusen.
 
Coupling the s y s t e m to an SQL database. After the remodelling, the system 
could answer queries in "Scandinavian" to an internal hospital database as well 
as CHAT-80 could answer Geography questions. HSQL produced a Prolog-like code 
FOL (First Order Logic) for execution. A mapping from FOL to the data base 
Schema was defined, and a translator from FOL to SQL was implemented. The 
example
 Hvilke menn ligger i en kvinnes seng?
 
(Which men lie in a woman's bed? )
 would be translated dryly into the SQL query: SELECT DISTINCT 
T3.name,Tl.sex,T2.reg_no,T3.sex, T4.reg_no,T4.bed_no,T5.hosp_no,T5.ward_no FROM 
PATIENT TI,OCCUPANCY T2,PATIENT T3, OCCUPANCY T4,WARD T5 WHERE (Tl.sex='f') AND 
(T2.reg_no=Tl.reg_no) AND (T3.sex='m') AND (T4.reg_no=T3.reg_no) AND 
(T4.bed_no=T2.bed_no) AND (T5.hosp_no=T4.hosp_no) AND (T5.ward_no=T4.ward_no) 
2.3 T h e T h e U n d e r s t a n d i n g C o m p u t e r The HSQL was a 
valuable experience in the effort to make transportable natural language 
interfaces. However, the underlying system CHAT-80 restricted the further 
development. After the HSQL Project was finished, an internal reseach project 
TUC (the Understanding Computer) was initiated at NTNU to carry on the results 
from HSQL. The project goals differed from those of HSQL in a number of ways, 
and would not be concerned with multimedia interfaces . On the other hand, 
portability and versatility were made central issues concerning the generality 
of the language and its applications. The research goals could be summarised as 
to  Give computers an operational understanding of natural language.  Build 
intelligent systems with natural language capabilities.  Study common sense 
reasoning in natural language. A test criterion for the understanding capacity 
is that after a set of definitions in a Naturally Readable Logic, NRL, the 
system's answer to queries in NRL should conform to the answers of an idealised 
rational agent.
 
( A translation is beside the point o.f being a long query in Norwegian.)
 2.2 HSQL - H e l p S y s t e m for SQL A Nordic project HSQL (Help System for 
SQL) was accomplished in 1988-89 to make a joint Nordic effort interfaces to 
databases. The HSQL project was led by the Swedish State Bureau (Statskontoret), 
with participants from Sweden, Denmark, Finland and Norway (Amble et al., 1990). 
The aim of HSQL was to build a natural language interface to SQL databases for 
the Scandinavian languages Swedish, Danish and Norwegian. These languages are 
very similar, and the Norwegian version of CHAT-80 was easily extended to the 
other Scandinavian languages. Instead of Geography, a more typical application 
area was chosen to be a query system for hospital administration. We decided to 
target an SQL database of a hospital administration which had been developed 
already. The next step was then to change the domain of discourse from Geography 
to hospital administration, using the same knowledge representation techniques 
used in CHAT-80. A semantic model of this domain was made, and then implemented 
in the CHAT-80 framework. The modelling technique that proved adequate was to 
use an extended Entity Relationship (ER) model with a class (type) hierarchy, 
attributes belonging to each class, single inheritance of attributes and 
relationships.
 
Every
 
man that lives loves Mary. John is a man. John lives. Who loves Mary? ==> John
 
3 Anatomy of the bus route oracle The main components of the bus route 
information systems are:  A parser system, consisting of a dictionary, a 
lexical processor, a grammar and a parser.  A knowledge base (KB), divided into 
a semantic KB and an application KB  A query processor, contalng a routing 
logic system, and a route data base. The system is bilingual and contains a 
double set of dictionary, morphology and grammar. Actually, it detects which 
language is most probable by counting the number of unknown words related to 
each language, and acts accordingly. The grammars are surprisingly similar, but 
no effort is made to coalesce them. The Norwegian grammar is slightly bigger 
than the English grammar, mostly because it is more elaborated but also because 
Norwegian allows a freer word order. 3.1 Features of BusTUC For the Norwegian 
systems, the figures give an indication of the size of the domain: 420 nouns, 
150 verbs, 165 adjectives, 60 prepositions, etc. There are 1300 grammar rules ( 
810 for English) although half of the rules are very low level. The semantic net 
described below contains about 4000 entries. A big name table of 3050 names in 
addition to the official station names, is required to capture the variety of 
naming. A simple spell correction is a part of the system ( essentially 1 
character errors). The pragmatic reasoning is needed to translate the output 
from the parser to a route database query language . This is done by a 
production system called Pragma, which acts like an advanced rewriting system 
with 580 rules. In addition, there is another rule base for actually generating 
the natural language answers (120 rules). The system is mainly written in Prolog 
(Sicstus Prolog 3.7), with some Perl programs for the communication and 
CGI-scripts. At the moment, there are about 35000 lines of programmed Prolog 
code (in addition to route tables which are also in Prolog). Average response 
time is usually less than 2 seconds, but there are queries that demand up to 10 
seconds. The error rate for single, correct, complete and relevant questions is 
about 2 percent.
 
NRL is defined in a closed context. Thus interfaces to other systems are in 
principle defined through simulating the environment as a dialogue partner. TUC 
is a prototypical natural language processor for English written in Prolog. It 
is designed to be a general purpose easily adaptable natural language processor. 
It consists of a general grammar for a subset of English, a semantic knowledge 
base, and modules for interfaces to other interfaces like UNIX, SQL-databases 
and general textual information sources. 2.4 The TABOR Project
 
It so happened that a Universtity Project was starteded in 1996, called T A B O 
R ( " Speech based user interfaces and reasoning systems "), with the aim of 
building an automatic public transport route oracle, available over the public 
telephone. At the onset of the project, the World Wide Web was fresh, and not as 
widespread as today, and the telephone was still regarded as the main source of 
information for the public. Since then, the Internet became the dominant medium, 
and it is as likeley to find a computer with Internet connection, as to find a 
local busroute table. ( The consequtive wide spreading of cellular phones 
changed the picture in favour of the telephone, but that is another story). It 
was decided that a text based information system should be built, regardless of 
the status of the speech rocgnition and speech synthesis effort, which proved to 
lag behind after a while.
 
The BusTUC system
 The resulting system BusTUC grew out as a natural application of TUC, and an 
English prototype could be built within a few months (Bratseth, 1997). Since the 
summer 1996, the prototype was put onto the Internet, and been developed and 
tested more or less continually until today. The most important extension was 
that the system was made bilingual (Norwegian and English) during the fall 1996. 
In spring 1999, the BusTUC was finally adopted by the local bus company in 
Trondheim ( A/S Trondheim Trafikkselskap), which set up a server ( a 300 MHz PC 
with Linux). Until today, over 150.000 questions have been answered, and BusTUC 
seems to stabilize and grow increasingly popular.
 
3.2 The Parser S y s t e m The G r a m m a r S y s t e m The grammar is based on 
a simple grammar for statements, while questions and commands are derived by the 
use of movements. The grammar 3
 
fiformalism which is called Consensical Grammar, (CONtext SENSitive 
CompositionAL Grammar) is an easy to use variant of Extraposition Grammar 
(Pereira and Warren, 1980), which is a generalisation of Definite Clause 
Grammars. Compositional grammar means that the semantics of a a phrase is 
composed of the semantics of the subphrases; the basic constituents being a form 
of verb complements. As for Extraposition grammars, a grammar is translated to 
Definite Clause Grammars, and executed as
 such. A characteristic syntactic expression in Consensical G r a m m a r m a y 
define an incomplete construct in terms of a "difference " between complete 
constructs. W h e n possible, the parser will use the subtracted part in stead 
of reading from the input, after a gap if necessary. The effect is the same as 
for Ex-
 
which is analysed as
 for which X is it true that the (X) person has a dog that barked?
 
where the last line is analysed as a s t a t e m e n t . Movement is easily 
handled in Consensical Grammar without making special phrase rules for each kind 
of movement. The following example shows how TUC manages a variety of analyses 
using movements:
 Max said Bill thought Joe believed Fido Barked. Who said Bill thought Joe 
believed Fido barked? Who did Max say thought Joe believed Fido barked?
 
traposition grammars, but the this format is more intuitive. Examples of grammar 
rules.
 
Who did Max say Bill thought believed Fido barked?
 
T h e parser The experiences with Consensical grammars are a bit mixed however. 
The main problem is the parsing method itself, which is top down with 
backtracking. Many principles that would prove elegant for small domains turned 
out to be too costly for larger domains, due to the wide variety of modes of 
expressions, incredible ambiguities and the sheer size of the covered language. 
The disambiguation is a major problem for small grammars and large languages, 
and was solved by the following guidelines:  a semantic type checking was 
integrated into the parser, and would help to discard sematica/ly wrong parses 
from the start.  a heuristics was followed that proved almost irreproachable: 
The longest possible phrase of a category that is semantically correct is in 
most cases the preferred interpretation.  due to the perplexity of the 
language, some committed choices (cuts) had to be inserted into the grammar at 
strategic places. As one could fear however, this implied that wrong choices 
being made at some point in the parsing could not be recovered by backtracking. 
These problems also made it imperative to introduce a timeout on the parsing 
process of embarassing 10 seconds. Although most sentences, would be parsed 
within a second, some legal sentences of moderate size actually need this time. 
4
 
Example: Whose dog barked? is analysed as if the sentence had been Who has a dog 
t h a t barked? which is analysed as Which p e r s o n has a dog t h a t 
barked?
 
fi3.3 The semantic knowledge base Adaptability means that the system does not 
need to be reprogrammed for each new application. The design principle of TUC is 
that most of the changes are made in a tabular semantic knowledge base, while 
there is one general grammar and dictionary. In general, the logic is generated 
automatically from the semantic knowledge base. The nouns play a key role in the 
understanding part as they constitute the class or type hierarchy. Nouns are 
defined in an a - k i n d - o f hierarchy. The hierarchy is tree-structured with 
single inheritance. The top level also constitute the top level ontology of 
TUC's world. In fact, a type check of the compliances of verbs, nouns adjectives 
and prepositions is not only necessary for the semantic processing but is 
essential for the syntax analysis for the disambiguation as well. In TUC, the 
legal combinations are carefully assembled in the semantic network, which then 
serves a dual purpose. These semantic definitions are necessary to allow for 
instance the following sentences
 The dog saw a man with a telescope. The man saw a dog with a telescope.
 
gives exactly the same code.
 
% Type of question % tuc is a program % A is a real bus % B isa saturday % Nidar 
is a place % D is an event Y. C was known at D
 
Y. E is an event in C
 
action(go,E), Y. the action of E is Go actor(A,E), Y. the actor of E is A 
srel(to,place,nidar,E),Y. E is to nidar srel(on,time,B,E), y, E is on the 
saturday B
 
to be treated differently because with telescope m a y modify the noun man but 
not the noun dog, while with telescope modifies the verb see, restricted to 
person.
 
The event parameter plays an important role in the semantics. It is used for 
various purposes. The most salient role is to identify a subset of time and 
space in which an action or event occured. Both the actual time and space 
coordinates are connected to the actions through the event parameter. Pragmatic 
reasoning The TQL is translated to a route database query language (BusLOG) 
which is actually a Prolog program. This is done by a production system called 
Pragma, which acts like an advanced rewriting system with 580 rules. In 
addition, there is another rule base for actually generating the natural 
language answers (120 rules). 4 Conclusions The TUC approach has as its goal to 
automate the creation of new natural language interfaces for a well defined 
subset of the language and with a minimum of explicit programming. The 
implemented system has proved its worth, and is interesting if for no other 
reason. There is also an increasing interest from other bus companies and route 
information companies alike to get a similar system for their customers. Further 
work remains to make the parser really efficient, and much work remains to make 
the language coverage complete within reasonable limits. It is an open question 
whether the system of this kind will be a preferred way of offering information 
to the public. If it is, it is a fair amount of work to make it a portable 
system that can be implemented elsewhere, also connecting various travelling 
agencies. If not, it will remain a curiosity. But anyway, a system like this 
will be a contribution to the development of intelligent systems. 
 
3.4 The Query Processor Event Calculus The semantics of the phrases are built up 
by a kind of verb complements, where the event play a central role. The text is 
translated from Natural language into a form called TQL (Temporal Query 
Language/ TUC Query Language) which is a first order event calculus expression, 
a self contained expression containing the literal meaning of an utterance. A 
formalism TQL that was defined, inspired by the Event Calculus by Kowalski and 
Sergot (Kowalski and Sergot, 1986). The TQL expressions consist of predicates, 
functions, constants and variables. The textual words of nouns and verbs are 
translated to generic predicates using the selected interpretation. The 
following question
 Do you know whether the bus goes
 
to Nidar on Saturday ? would give the TQL expression below. Typically, the 
Norwegian equivalent
 Vet du om bussen gaar til Nidar paa soendag ?

References 

Tore Amble, Erik Knudsen, Aarno Lehtola, Jan Ljungberg, and Ole Ravnholt. 1990. Naturlig Spr~k och Grafik - nya vSgar inn i databaser.  Statskontoret. Rapport om HSQL, ett kunskapsbaseret hj~lpsystem fSr SQL. 

Jon S. Bratseth. 1997. BusTUC - A Natural Language Bus Traffic Informations System. Master's thesis, The Norwegian University of Science and Technology. 

R. Kowalski and M. Sergot. 1986. A logic based calculus of events. New Generation Computing, 8(0):67-95. 

F. C. N. Pereira and D. H. D. Warren. 1980. Definite clause grammar for language analysis. Artificial Intelligence, 0(3). 

J. Teigen and V. Vetland. 1988. Syntax analysis of norwegian language. Technical report, The Norwegian Institute of Technology. 

J. Teigen and V. Vetland. 1989. Handling reasonable questions beyond the linguistic and conceptual coverage of natural language interfaces. Master's thesis, The Norwegian Institute of Technology. 

D. H. D Warren and F. C. N. Pereira. 1982. An efficient and easily adaptable system for interpreting natural language queries. Computational Linguistics, 8(3-4). 
